>>JAY DYER: Is there a deeper,
hidden, more esoteric meaning
to the Hollywood films
that we all love to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>JAY WEIDNER: And
I'm Jay Weidner.
And you're watching
"Hollywood Decoded."
[THEME MUSIC]
>>DYER: We chose
"Inception" because it's
such a philosophically
profound film.
I think Christopher
Nolan is looking back
to ancient Greek mythology.
He's looking back to
ancient Indian philosophy
and the Vedic text.
And he's also
looking to Carl Jung.
And from this
mixture, what we get
is an artistic presentation
about the depth
of the human psyche and that
that's where we actually
have to dig down to.
We have to plumb those
depths to find healing.
And then it becomes an
archetypal message, itself,
for how all of mankind
can spiritually progress.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
So the whole point
of the movie is
inception, which is to plant
an idea into someone's head.
And what they want
to do is they want
to plant the idea into
this person's head
that their father forgave them.
And instead, the father, in
real life, did not forgive them.
But they want to implant that
idea so that that person now
believes that they
are their own man.
They will sell off their empire.
And the competition will win.
And I think that inception
is this kind of idea
that is difficult to pull off.
And Cobb is reluctant
to do it because he
knows how dangerous it is.
>>DYER: Boxes within boxes.
That's what we're
talking about here.
We have a structure that
is our subconscious.
We have another box, which
is the next layer down.
You have the architecture and
the houses that are there.
You go another layer
down and there's
other buildings and architecture
there with a box inside
of it, which has a
safe inside of it.
Right?
Those are the layers
of our subconscious.
And ultimately, what's
in the box is the totem.
And that's the totem
that Cobb, himself,
was supposed to
have to know if he
was in the waking
or the dream state.
So the final scene is he finds
the totem and he spends it.
And we don't know.
We're never told.
But the point is not really
the waking or the dream state.
The point is finding
solace, finding healing,
and finding peace, which
Cobb actually does.
>>WEIDNER: Yes, he does.
>>DYER: With his
children, at the end.
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
The most important
thing about this movie
is that it's a movie.
And movies are the
closest thing to what
the dream state is like.
And Christopher Nolan's really
taken that concept of a movie
being, you're in
the dark, and you're
seeing images and a story,
which is what a dream is like,
and then taking that and
making the ultimate dream
movie, which is what this is.
>>DYER: Which is surrealism.
Noir surrealism.
We've seen that before, in
other episodes that we've done.
And here, what Nolan
is doing is playing
with that in the
context of almost a kind
of a sci-fi story, in a way.
It's a very interesting mix of--
"Blade Runner's" a kind of
a similar idea of mixing
sci-fi and surrealism.
But surrealism really
has its origins
in ancient Indian philosophy.
Indian philosophy is
preoccupied with the importance
of the waking and the
dream state as equally
relevant to man's experience.
And so to understand the human
psyche and the human spirit
and spirituality, you
have to understand
both of those realms.
You can't just focus
on the waking state
and empirical observation.
You also have to look to
these archetypes, which
Carl Jung thought you could
pick apart and interpret
through the dream state.
>>WEIDNER: And Carl Jung
spent a great deal of time
looking at alchemical paintings
from the medieval times
and showing you that these are
archetypes from a deep state,
deep symbolic state.
And Nolan's reaching
into his bag of tricks
and pulling out his
archetypes that he
wants you to understand.
And these archetypes
are actually
quite profound and deep.
I'm really impressed
with Nolan's ability
to get complex subjects onto the
screen and have it make sense,
where Joe Six-pack could
watch it and like it too.
>>DYER: Right.
Right.
And what's neat about Jung is
that the archetypes, he thinks,
are actually universal.
There's a collective
unconscious that we all share.
And so when we go
into that dream state,
we're experiencing
phenomena that
are, in a quasi-real
sense, happening.
They're not real in
the same way that it's
real in the waking state.
But they're still, in
some spiritual way,
significant to us, real.
And so what's happening
here is that Cobb
is going to have to work
out his own inner labyrinth
in order to find
peace and solace.
And that's actually what's
going to happen in the film.
So let's look at the
first clip, which
is that he can't
remember where he is,
and it's a half
remembered dream.
>> I know what this is.
I've seen one before,
many, many years ago.
It belonged to a man I met
in a half-remembered dream,
a man possessed of
some radical notions.
>> What is the most
resilient parasite?
Bacteria?
A virus?
An intestinal worm?
>> Uh, what Mr. Cobb
is trying to say--
>> An idea.
Resilient.
Highly contagious.
Once an idea has taken
hold of the brain,
it's almost impossible
to eradicate.
An idea that is
fully formed, fully
understood, that sticks
right in there somewhere.
>>DYER: The first thing
that sticks out to me
about this scene is that he's
meeting with a man from the Far
East, Saito.
Right?
So this is an interaction with
far Eastern culture, which
has always focused
on the holistic dream
state of our waking state.
In other words, that reality
is a kind of maya or illusory
experience and that the
true reality might actually
be either a combination
of the waking
and the dream state,
or the dream state.
And so what we have at
the beginning of the film
is the same as the
end of the film.
This is Cobb sunk down
at the very lowest aspect
of his subconscious.
And he's forgotten himself.
And this is a perennial
aspect of gnostic philosophy,
that we have forgotten
our true origins.
We're lost in a dream state.
And can we wake up
within this dream state?
And that's Cobb's
process of coming out
of this maze, this labyrinth,
is finding who he really was.
>>WEIDNER: So time also
has three dimensions, just
as space has three dimensions.
And when you're sleeping,
you're not moving.
You're in bed.
But in your dream state, you're
moving around in a world,
a world that is mysterious.
And who constructed
this world, really?
And when you're awake, you
are moving around in 3D space.
But your brain is
linear now and not
thinking the way it
thinks in a dream state.
This movie is so
much like a dream
because it's so non-linear
that, like "Memento," you're
bouncing around,
and at first glance,
you're really kind of
not sure what's going on.
And then, as you really get
to understand the landscape
that Nolan is creating
here, it's really brilliant.
>>DYER: It's a complement to
"Insomnia," his other film,
his early film--
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
>>DYER: --where they're
stuck in Alaska.
And it's during the period when
there's extensive sunlight.
And you can't sleep.
So it's like they're imagining
being forced into the waking
state and how it
would drive you mad.
Here, you're forced into a
perpetual dream state and how
it would, in a
way, drive you mad
or into a kind of
forgetfulness of who you are.
And that's what's
happening with Cobb
is that he's got to overcome
this trauma with his wife, Mal.
And of course, all the names
have significance here,
Mal being in the
Latin, the root malice.
And so she represents, kind of,
his shade in the Jungian sense.
Saito is a kind of
far Eastern mystic
and represents Eastern thought.
And the other characters--
the Michael Caine character
represents, kind of, the
sage, the wisdom archetype.
So all of these
characters are archetypes.
And they are manifestations
of his psyche,
as he explains to
the other characters
that he thinks he's
helping in their dreams.
Right?
Which is actually all
happening within his dream.
>>WEIDNER: Right.
So the whole movie is
actually his dream.
>>DYER: I think so.
Yeah.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
I think so too.
And we never really find
out if he ever really
is reunited or anything.
So I think the movie is
really about getting caught
in a dilemma that you cannot get
out of, which is like Ariadne
again, trying to find your way
out of the labyrinth but not
really ever finding
your way out.
>>DYER: Well, we're going
to see an interesting aspect
to the connection between the
subconscious and a labyrinth,
or a maze, which goes
back to ancient Egypt
and other cultures.
And that's prominent
in this film.
And getting out of that maze.
And so let's look at
we're working together.
>> We were working together.
We were exploring the concept
of a dream within a dream.
And I kept pushing things.
I wanted to go
deeper and deeper.
I wanted to go further.
I just didn't
understand the concept
that hours could turn into years
down there, that we could get
trapped so deep that when we--
when we wound up on the shore
of our own subconscious,
we lost sight of what was real.
>>DYER: So what we have
here is a lot of tie-ins
to mythology and
ancient traditions.
>> We created.
We built the world
for ourselves.
We did that for years.
We built our own world.
>> How long were
you stuck there?
>> Something like 50 years.
>> Jeez.
How could you stand it?
>> It wasn't so bad at
first, feeling like Gods.
The problem was knowing
that none of it was real.
Eventually, it just
became impossible
for me to live like that.
>> And what about for her?
>> She had locked
something away,
something deep inside her, a
truth that she had once known
but--
but chose to forget.
Limbo became her reality.
>>DYER: So in the
Greek tradition,
you have the story of
King Minos imprisoning
Theseus in his labyrinth.
And it's Ariadne who's
the character who
helps him get out.
And the Ellen Page character
here is playing that role.
She is Ariadne by the name.
And what she is doing
is trying to help
Cobb realize that he's stuck in
this prison of his own making.
Right?
It's kind of a solipsism,
which in philosophy is just
the idea that everything is
a projection of our mind.
That also ties into the ancient
Vedic tradition of maya,
that the reality
that we experience
is something that's either
a psychological projection
of our minds, of
our subconscious,
or it's just a
fantasmical illusion.
Right?
And that that awakening actually
centers around coming out
of that dream state.
And that's exactly what
happens to Cobb here
is that he is in a kind of
Hades or a kind of underworld.
And that's-- the
deeper that they go--
he calls it the shores
of the subconscious--
he's stuck there.
And it's all about him getting
out of that through the process
of spiritual awakening.
>>WEIDNER: I think that
we have to understand
that Cobb has fallen into
this hell, this Hades.
And everybody in this
movie is falling.
The kick, which is how you
find out where you are in time,
is you falling backwards.
The van on the
bridge is falling.
Mal jumps to her death.
The falling is, itself,
what you're doing.
Every layer you go down
deeper, time is more stretched,
it takes longer.
So the Japanese fellow,
he is living 50,
60 years down at the very
bottom sublevel, where
Cobb is trying to save him.
Whether he actually
does save him or not
is really kind of
evasive because we
don't know if we're
watching Cobb's dream
through the entire movie or
Cobb coming out of his dream
at the end of the movie.
>>DYER: Right.
Yeah.
It's left a little ambiguous.
But we have what they call,
in the film, the totem.
And the totem is supposed to be
the key that helps you wake up
and realize whether
you're in the dream state
or the waking state.
And we never know until the
end what Mal has hidden away
in this box.
But I think the real
secret of the film
is that Mal and what's in the
box is ultimately about Cobb.
Right?
Because there's also the Cillian
Murphy character, Fischer.
There's some secret
that's stashed
away in some safe
somewhere that that
is supposed to be his story.
But all of these character
stories and unconscious
that we're stepping
into in the film,
it's all Cobb's unconscious.
That box, that treasure
that's hidden away,
is the secret that
he has with Mal.
And it's that him and Mal
had a traumatic experience.
And he's blaming himself.
And he can never get out of
this until he forgives himself.
That's what it's all about.
>>WEIDNER: He understands
the concept of inception
because he put a
thought into Mal.
And that thought is like
a Frankenstein monster
coming back to haunt him.
So he also knows that you can
implant a thought in someone,
but it's not necessarily
a good thing.
And in the end, it
cost Mal her life.
>>DYER: Right.
Yeah.
And he blames himself for that.
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
>>DYER: Right?
And so the only way that
he's going to find redemption
is through self-forgive--
forgiving himself, basically.
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
>>DYER: That's the
whole point of the film.
But it's just fascinating to
me that all these characters,
all these names, they
have some significance.
Cobb, I think,
you could probably
connect it to Kabbalah.
Right?
Or he works for this
enigmatic company, Cobol,
which we never know what it is.
But what's
interesting about that
is that there's even a
kind of a hint from Mal,
where she says to him, stop and
think about this for a minute.
You're being chased
around the globe
by enigmatic corporations.
You've got some box
that lets you step
into other people's dreams.
Doesn't that sound a
little fantastical?
Right?
But he believes it's real.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
>>DYER: So we're being given
clues that this whole thing is
Cobb's dream.
>>WEIDNER: Well, it does.
And it's Cobb having
almost a James Bond kind
of dream, where
he's in adventures
in the snow, and skiing, and
car chases, and the whole thing.
And it's come--
>>DYER: It's fantastical.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, it does.
It becomes ridiculously
fantastical at some point.
And you realize, oh, this
has to be Cobb's dream.
And Cobb is still stuck
down there somewhere.
And maybe nobody in this
movie is actually real.
>>DYER: Yeah.
>>WEIDNER: Except for Cobb.
>>DYER: They're all
manifestations of his psyche
because if you notice, at no
point do they come after Cobb,
that I can recall.
That was one of his keys
to let you know that you're
in your dream state.
Right?
>>WEIDNER: Right.
>>DYER: So I think,
next, we want
to look at what is the key
to how he, in some degree,
gets out of the-- he may not
totally get out of the dream
state, but at least,
achieves some kind
of solace or some kind
of spiritual plateau
where he can find happiness.
And that's when he
finally forgives himself.
So let's look at you
have to forgive yourself.
>> Your guilt defines her.
It's what powers her.
You are not responsible for
the idea that destroyed her.
And if we are going
to succeed in this,
you have to forgive yourself.
And you're going to
have to confront her.
But you don't have
to do that alone.
>> No, no, no.
>> I'm doing it for the others
because they have no idea
the risk they've taken,
coming down here with you.
>>DYER: Cobb has
been traumatized.
And he's traumatized by,
apparently, the suicide
of his wife at some point.
And so what happens is that
he blames himself for this.
And he's a prisoner
of his memories.
That's another
aspect of this film
is that we can be prisoners to
things that we've done wrong
in the past that can haunt
us and cause us to basically
have a miserable life.
And the only way out
of that is to realize
that the message of these
kinds of movies, these kinds
of films, can be healing.
It can be redemptive.
It can show us that through
forgiving ourselves and letting
these things go, we
can actually move on
in the process of healing.
>>WEIDNER: So the scene in the
movie where Ariadne is learning
her practice, how to construct
the worlds in the dream state,
and she takes these two giant
mirrors that she constructs
and puts them across from each
other and creates that kind
of-- you know,
the mirror effect,
where he's caught in
the infinite time--
right?-- I think this is very
symbolic of the trap that
Leonar--
that Cobb is caught in.
And what's interesting
about that scene, and some
of the other scenes, is if you
start talking about the dream
state to each
other in the dream,
you cause all the people,
your fantastic people that
aren't real, to suddenly
become antagonistic toward you
because they're beginning to
realize that they're not real.
And they're caught
in your dream.
And they don't like it.
>>DYER: Yeah.
There's so many
things going on here.
What's happening with these
various levels and dream states
is that Cobb is having to
work out not just the issue
with Mal but also other issues.
So the Fischer character that's
played by Cillian Murphy,
he's having this
battle with his father
over the empire,
this giant wealth,
you know, that they have stored
up, that he's inheriting.
And this is, in some way,
some kind of an issue
that Cobb has with his father.
And so this is the
child/father battle
over who's going to take on the
reins of power and so forth.
And that's another
aspect of what
Cobb's having to work through.
So none of the stories
are about Fischer.
It's not about Ariadne.
It's not about Mal.
It's all about Cobb and all
of these different traumas.
And what we know from
psychology is that trauma
can fragment our psyche.
It can cause us to be
split and disintegrated.
And one of the things that
Carl Jung always talked about
was integration.
And so he--
Cobb is going through this
self-actualization and
self-integration process, in
all these levels of the dream
state, to achieve healing.
>>WEIDNER: That's a very
interesting interpretation,
in that the entire movie is
just Cobb's dream and reflection
of his own life and
that everybody in there
is essentially maya, in the
whole movie, except for him.
And so the question
then becomes,
does he get out of
the dream or not?
>>DYER: Right.
And I think that's
left up to debate.
But we see the top spinning.
We don't know.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>DYER: We don't
know, at the end,
whether it might look like a
little-- wobbles a little bit,
which would mean
that he's waking up.
But he may not wake up because
he's back with his children.
And so he does find
some kind of redemption.
So the next clip
we want to look at
is the explicit statement
that your world is not real.
>> Listen.
There's something you should
know about me, about inception.
An idea is like a virus,
resilient, highly contagious.
And the smallest seed
of an idea can grow.
It can grow to define
or destroy you.
>> The smallest idea, such
as your world is not real.
Simple little thought
that changes everything.
So certain of your world?
Of what's real?
Do you think he is?
Or do you think he's
as lost as I was?
>> I know what's real, Mal.
>> No creeping doubts?
Not feeling persecuted, Dom?
Chased around the globe
by anonymous corporations
and police forces, the
way the projections
persecute the dreamer?
Admit it.
You don't believe in
one reality anymore.
So choose.
Choose to be here.
Choose me.
>>DYER: One of the clues that we
know that this is all going on
in Cobb's mind, in
his subconscious,
is the fact that you
see, in one scene,
Mal stepping on a wine
glass, and then, later, you
see the same scene
played out again,
but it's Ariadne that
steps on the wine glass.
And so she is appearing
to him and trying
to lead him and
heal him in a way.
So she functions as
this kind of guide,
which is what she functions
as in the Greek mythology.
Right?
To lead him out of the trauma
state of being stuck in Hades
and towards finding redemption.
But there's all kinds
of clues like that
that I think show us that the
whole story is Cobb's healing
process.
And in that way, it's an
allegory for all of us.
We all have the same traumas.
We can all be fragmented
in our psyche and so forth,
in some degree.
And it's really through
the integration process
that Carl Jung talked about
that we can find this healing.
>>WEIDNER: I think that is
what this movie is about.
It's ultimately a
very optimistic film.
Once more, Chris
Nolan takes us down
deep into our psyche, which
he did in the Batman series--
>>DYER: Mm-hmm.
Exactly.
--and Memento.
And I think that in the end,
this is probably his best film,
to date, and definitely one
of the most intellectually
challenging films ever made.
>>DYER: The idea of
architecture fills this film.
And we see cities being
built in the mind.
We see cities that
we think are actually
out there in the external
world, but they're also
part of the mind.
And they exist in different
forms and different layers
and different levels.
When they get to the lowest
level, subconscious, it's--
Cobb has constructed a world
that is based on prior memories
in the waking state,
where he and his wife
were building sandcastles.
But in his subconscious, they
are these giant structures
that seem to fall apart, like
when they were destroying
the sandcastles.
What is the meaning of all that?
Well, it's that our mind is,
I think, structured, in a way,
kind of like a building.
There is an architecture
of the mind.
And there's layers to the mind.
And many great
psychologists, philosophers,
ancient religious traditions
have spoken this way.
Ancient Indians.
The ancient Egyptians
spoke this way.
And so the point of this movie;
very deep, very esoteric,
is that mankind, as a
whole, and each individual
has the same issues.
They have the same
problems and traumas.
And the way out of the maze
that we're all stuck in
is the same for all of us.
We all have to face the
trauma, forgive ourselves,
go through a
reconciliation process,
an actualization process,
an awakening process.
Healing and integration
then occurs.
And we progress on into
the spiritual state forever
and ever, I would say, because
I think there is an afterlife.
The film kind of
shows that, too.
It kind of hints that
the p-- did he die?
Is he in some sort of
dream coma, spiritual state
where he's passed on?
Either way, it's
a positive message
about not fearing death,
about being reconciled
and progressing into eternity.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And I also think that the
reason that he's showing us
all of this architecture
is Jung frequently
asked himself, where do
all these images come from?
I'll have a dream of a
city that does not exist.
Did I build this city?
Did I make it?
Did it come from somewhere else?
And I think that's what
Nolan is asking us here.
Where do these things come from?
How is it possible?
For instance, I had
a dream once where
I watched a band
with like 21 members
play a very complicated
piece of music
that I had never heard before.
Did I make that music up?
Did I compose that
music in my dream?
Or did it come from
somewhere else?
And I think, again, this
is what Nolan is asking.
What is real?
And what isn't?
And we can use that process
of bifurcated reality
between the dream state
and the waking state
to become a more
full human being,
to get past the trauma
of our childhood
and possible parental
mistakes, and find our way out
of the wilderness, out
of the maze, as you say.
>>DYER: Right.
That is one of the
redeeming aspects
of ancient Indian philosophy is
that it taught that very thing.
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
>>DYER: It taught that the
waking state and the dream
state were equally important
and that to unify these two,
ultimately, would
be, at least, one
stage on the process
of enlightenment,
that we wouldn't be
split between these two
seemingly different
worlds, the outer world.
And then when we're
in the dream state,
we're involved in the
inner subconscious world.
If these two worlds could be
united, then we would, I think,
have much more insight.
We would be able to
experience reality
in a very different way.
And that's really
what I think is
at the core of
enlightenment, at least,
in that ancient tradition.
>>WEIDNER: And we
know, in real life,
that when Crick and
Watson were trying
to discover the shape of DNA,
they struggled and struggled.
And one night Crick was
exhausted, went home,
and dreamed of the
shape of the DNA,
and became the Nobel Prize
winning discovery of the 50s.
And so we know that
dreams can teach us
about this hard, cold
reality we live in.
And that hard, cold reality
can also affect the dreams.
And together, they work
together to help us understand
what we are as an individual.
[THEME MUSIC]
>>DYER: Absolutely.
Join us again next time
on "Hollywood Decoded."
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>WEIDNER: And I'm Jay Weidner.
Thanks for watching.